# 2016 TRB Annual Meeting Session 547: From Ad Hoc to Scientific: Moderated Discussion on Improving Travel Forecasting Methods

*Notes by Rebekah Anderson*

## Part One: Introduction
Joan Walker introduced the topic, which was to see if there was a way to make models more scientific, similar to how the hurricane forecasting models are developed and tested.  The goal at the end of the session is to have ideas that can be implemented over the next year.

## Part Two: Straw man Proposal Overview
Dave Ory (MTC) developed a straw man proposal, which was something to elicit discussion.  His proposal was called “Travel Modeling as Science.”  Most people thought that travel modeling did not have the ability to be scientifically evaluated.  The idea was to determine if there was a way to compare models to determine if there is a better product. The Product is a framework that is able to make useful predictions.  “Useful” is predictions that are reasonably accurate, tractable and realistic.  “Framework” must have software that is legible, fast and flexible.  Set of models with a reasonable set of inputs, a minimum set of outputs, and a fixed execution sequence.   1 - How does the framework evolve: annual release.  Half the year people submit additions to the framework.  The other half is evaluations of what additions should be accepted.  2 - Modification requests must be demonstrated as objectively valuable - shown over 2 regions (Atlanta and Bay Area) and backcasting over several years.  Or demonstrate software improvements.  3 - Test bed regions. Options are 1 with lots of data or several with not so in depth data.  Needed data include supply as well as validation/estimation data.  4 - A significant amount of money would be available for grants.  The amount of money was “excessive” as this is just a proposal.  There is also the expectation that several competing ideas would be funded and then the outcomes could be evaluated.  The requirement is that a modification request would be then submitted.  5 - There is a thought that the transfer of knowledge from academia to practice have largely failed.  6 - This is an expensive proposal, but it would be a fraction of the current total expenditures.  However, the ROI is thought to be an order of magnitude greater.  (Hence, he is not thinking about how to pay for this proposal at the moment.) 

## Part Three: Private Sector Response
### Stephen Lawe (RSG)
Three points.  1 - Science (objective, rigorous, fact based and tested). At the moment, we are more heavily on the Arts (subjective, responsive and untested) side.  The usefulness of a model is really a combination of both of these.  The details of the structure need to be reasonable/useful.  We have added a ton of detail that we could possibly use and then backed off a little.  2 - WRT 5 people, we have not historically engaged the people who are consumers of our results.  If anything can proceed effectively, we need to include policy makers.  3 - There is a difference between short-term and long-term forecasting.  (It doesn’t seem to make sense to run a DTA for a 30 year forecast.). We need to determine exactly who is the audience for this and it would be useful to determine how users interact with their models.  We need to determine what we expect the output of the model to be. Comments - Liked the initiative.  Moving research into a practical sense (is this actually answering the questions we need to answer).

### Elizabeth Sall (UrbanLabs)
Improving models won’t necessarily improve the whole value chain.  The value chain starts with a good question, which requires the policy makers.  Then tools - we need to become better analysts.  We need to know how to better use the model’s data and show that data in a more accessible way to decision makers.  Then communication - we need to think about all the costs (including time) that we are willing to invest to create impacts.  We need to involve planners, engineers, academics, statisticians, futurists and decision-makers in the decision making process.  There needs to be some flexibility to meet the variety of needs.  There are reasons why SFCTA has a different model than MTC - there are different needs.  A single framework seems a bit limiting.  Integrated LU models might produce very strange results.  She suggested a plug-in based framework.  (E.g. R allows you to install packages that have a certain set of tools that are useful for specific needs.)

John Gliebe (audience) noted that with hurricanes, they use several different models, but we tend to use just the “one” model.

Jon Erlich (audience) notes that we don't even have a set of standard questions.  Dave Ory noted that everyone needs to conduct LRP and conformity.

## Part Four: Academic Response
### Eric Miller
Investment into this task is something almost everyone can agree upon.  Concerns to the strawman include: getting the right model structure, science vs. engineering (the proposal is missing a theory that can be scientifically tested), and software (others on the slide).  Eric feels that “framework” needs to be expanded.  The “winner take all” is problematic.  Framework needs to be a software environment that can then be used in model systems.  What is missing is a better specific model inside the overall model.  There should be the ability to test specific models.  For Science, there needs to be a theory.  (E.g. We developed atomic theory, not did research to build a bomb.). Behavioral theory is still a huge limitation.  Model development needs to be severed from operational deadlines.  There is limited opportunity to experiment.  Do modelers ever reject a bad model?  It appears that all bad models are blamed on bad data.  The idea of “regional labs” makes a lot of sense, but there needs to be the ability to not just tweak models that benefit these large cities.  The biggest challenge is the software development.  Sees that this proposal is about building a lab within which we can do controlled experiments.  

### Moshe Ben-Akiva
Engineering is about being useful.  Science is about finding the tools - developing theories and conducting experiments. If there is a set of tools in a framework, there there’s no reason to develop this.  Science requires a laboratory. What is the requirements for a laboratory?  This should satisfy 3 requirements.  1. Needs to be accessible.  Everyone should be able to access it without much overhead.  2 - Needs to be replicable.  The same experiment should be testable in other labs or with other models.  3 - Comparability.  How to we compare results - test different models in different environments. MIT has already done work into developing such a lab.  MITSIMLab - open source, but not too well used.  It was not user friendly.  Biogeme is an example that is more well used.  SimMobility is a framework designed to be flexible in terms of what models and what solutions it can test: long term, mid-term and short-term modules and agents can flow between the different modules.  We need presentations on model A vs. model B.

## Part Five: Public Sector Response
Vladimir and Rebekah presented.  Vladimir presented a SWOT analysis with very insightful criticisms.

Billy Charlton (audience) suggested that we adopt an Apache framework as an amendment.   Jeff suggested that perhaps we need to do “clinical trials.”  

## Part Six: Federal Response
### Brian Gardner
Questions have changed a bit - more into operations than new construction.  Scientific rigor is necessary.  Examination, review and quality checks need to be focused on specific points (e.g. Traffic forecast volumes, …). Benchmarking and identifying best practices are very important and ways should be found to adopt these, especially with respect to moving research into practice.  Test beds are critical.  Need to develop metadata standards, including operations.  How do we represent operational concepts.  (Agencies as agents.). This is a more powerful modeling concept than v/c ratios.  Needs a test bed for a smaller city as well.  This is very useful for proof-of-concept due to quick turn-around times.  SHRP2 C10 could support the development of test beds.  MOVES and STOPS were developed for a very specific purposes to answer specific questions.  Notes that economic trends have a huge impact on travel.  It is currently external to travel demand models, but is impossible to forecast. The commercial sector is a very critical component to developing tools for these analyses.

